It's a hot night.
Thank you. All right. Good evening,
everybody. We are um about to start our
June 25th board of finance meeting. Um
we'll call that to order. And our first
order of business is the pledge of
allegiance. So, I pledge allegiance to
the flag of the United States of America
of America and to the republic for which
it stands for it stands. One nation
under God, under God, indivisible, with
liberty and justice. Justice for all.
Okay.
Um, second order of business is um
public speak. So, as I call your name
and go around, if you don't mind, just
unmute yourself and um
say your thoughts. So, we'll start with
um
let's see.
Linda Fish.
All set. Thanks.
Thank you, Linda. Terry Smith, I'm all
set. Joanne, thank you. You're welcome.
Annette.
Thank you.
Chris Heracoli.
Chris's death. No, I realize that I I
noticed that at the other meetings they
call everybody. Thank you. Uh Val Bruno,
all set Joanne. Thank you.
Kathy Maldonado.
All set.
Thank you very much. Um we'll move on to
number three on our agenda, which is
changes or additions to our agenda this
evening. Does anyone from the board have
any changes or additions they'd like to
to um do?
I can't hear you, Liz. I don't have
anything. Sorry. Yeah, I I'm kind of on
the fence. Um myself, I'm the one that
added a couple items to this agenda
because I think it's important that
something that was discussed at a board
of selectmen meeting and referenced a
board of finance action that we talk
about it as a board. You know, because
it was our action that was talked about
or um you know, discussed at that
meeting. I think it's important that our
board also weigh in on that. But I also
think um and I know we have our auditor
here. Thank you, Michael, for joining us
um from Aony Sable
um and company I think it's called. Um
so we're we're lucky to have him
tonight. So we're probably going to
bring up a couple things during that
discussion of the audit too, but I
definitely wanted to put it on our
agenda because I think it's important
that we discuss it as a board. Noticing
that Bill and Mark aren't here. It might
be better to have all of us talk about
it. You agree with so I mean I may you
all think so? I mean I think we can't
have these discussions with half of us
you know or not half but even missing
two key members or two members of the
board whether it was you know Go ahead,
Kim. I'd like to make sure that we do
discuss it tonight. Oh you want to? I'm
happy to. I'm the one that put it on the
agenda. We can discuss it, but I'd like
to further discuss it some more, too.
Um, I just it's it's nonproductive if we
as a group don't talk about things
together. And I feel like when we hear
it from second parties, it's not always
the complete picture. But all right,
then we'll keep it on the agenda and
maybe bring it up again next month. Um,
so that's all I have. Any other changes
or deletions tonight?
Okay, with that being said, we'll move
on to number four of our agenda, which
is our
um
I retitled it because I think it's
important. Um it was brought to my
attention as audit review, but I think
it's good for our minutes and notes to
always have the year we're going to be
discussing on there. So, it's our, you
know, fiscal year 2024
town of Andover audit review, um, with
Mahoney Sable and Company. And
I'll turn the meeting over to Michael,
um, who can present to us. Um, I I wish
Cheryl was here tonight. I appreciate
that Chris is sitting in in herstead,
but I think it's important to have our
treasurer at these also in case any of
us have direct questions, but here we
are. So, Eric, I don't know if Michael
needs um his presentation put up or
whatever, but all set for you, Michael.
Thank you. Mike, you should be able to
share your presentation directly. All
right, I will uh share now.
Okay. And hopefully everyone can see the
uh the presentation.
All right. And then um again, just as an
introduction, uh my name is Mike Van
Devener. I am a partner at Mahoney Sable
uh ultimately responsible for overseeing
uh the audit and issuing the reports. Um
hopefully by now you've all received
electronic copies of the reports that
were issued in connection with the
audit. Um, I also have this presentation
that will really provide an overview of
the scope of work, uh, the audit
results, and then, uh, it'll it'll
include our required communications. Uh,
and obviously I'm happy to answer any
questions that, uh, any of the board
members may have. Um, so with that, uh,
turning to slide two, as far as the
scope of work, uh, really no changes
from prior years. So, we did do an audit
of the town's financial statements. uh
we perform that audit in accordance with
both the auditing standards issued by
the American Institute of Certified
Public Accountants as well as the
government auditing standards issued by
the government accountability office. Uh
in addition based on the level of
federal and state funding that was
received and expended by the town, we
did perform both federal and state
single audits. Uh we also perform an
agreed upon procedures uh engagement on
the end ofear school year reports that
are filed by the school district with
the uh state of Connecticut Department
of Education.
So in connection with each of those
services we issue reports. Uh but we do
also provide some non- audit services
for the town. Uh so we do assist in the
preparation of the financial statement,
the schedules of expenditures of federal
awards and state financial assistance as
well as the related notes. Uh we also
assist in converting the town's
governmental fund financial statements
to the governmentwide financial
statements. Uh in order for the firm to
be independent and be able to perform
these services, uh management is
required to oversee and and ultimately
accept responsibilities for them. Uh and
Cheryl as the town treasurer uh has
accepted responsibility for those non-
audit services.
Uh in connection with the audit, we do
issue a number of reports. Uh in terms
of the report on the financial
statements, we did issue unmodified
clean opinions on the town's financial
statements. Again, an unmodified opinion
is expressed when we've concluded that
the financial statements are presented
fairly in all material respects in
accordance with accounting principles
generally accepted in the United States
of America and that is is established by
the governmental accounting standards
board. Uh I do like to point out that
our opinion does only provide reasonable
assurance that the financial statements
are free from a material misstatement
whether due to error or fraud. Um we do
not test every transaction. Um there are
uh significant estimates that are
included in the financial statements. Uh
and therefore an audit cannot provide
absolute assurance. Um but again
reasonable assurance is still a very
high level of assurance.
Uh in addition to the report on the
financial statements, we also issue a
report on compliance and on internal
control over financial reporting. Uh if
you uh read this report, um I just like
to to clarify that we do not actually
express an opinion on the town's
compliance with laws and regulations or
on the effectiveness of the town's
internal patrols. Uh essentially during
the course of performing the audit, if
we become aware of a material
non-compliance with laws and regulations
or what we would consider to be a
significant deficiency or material
weakness in the town's internal
controls, uh we're required to uh
include it in this report. Um and again,
we did not report any material
non-compliance of laws and regulations.
Um however, we did report uh certain
findings related to the town's internal
control over financial reporting. Um and
then just to give a quick uh summary uh
status update from the prior year audit
findings because whenever we do a
current year audit we always look at the
prior year findings first. Um so in the
prior year we did have three findings.
Uh the first one was a material weakness
in internal control over financial
reporting related to the school
district's general ledger maintenance.
Um based on the results of our audit
this year, uh we determined that that
finding was no longer necessary. Um and
again, we did not repeat that finding in
the current year.
Um we also uh reported a material
weakness in internal control over
financial reporting uh related to the
school district's bank and interfund
reconciliations.
Again, based on the results of our audit
work this year, um we did repeat that
finding, but we lowered the severity of
the finding from a material weakness to
a significant efficiency. Um and again,
that was based on the overall results.
We saw some significant improvement uh
in those reconciliations. Um we did have
a few adjustments um but they really
only impacted the bank and the interfund
accounts. they had no impact really on
the on the board of education's
expenditures. Uh and therefore uh we
only reported it as a significant
deficiency this year rather than a
material weakness. Uh and then the last
finding was a material weakness in
internal control over financial
reporting related to the reconciliation
of the towns and school districts
general ledgers. um we did repeat that
as a material weakness in internal
control over financial reporting uh in
the current year and I'll provide some
additional information on that finding
on the next slide.
Um so as I mentioned we uh did have some
current year findings um both that were
uh repeated from the prior year. Uh the
first finding was a material weakness in
internal control of financial reporting
related to the reconciliation uh of the
school district's general ledger with
the towns. Um so
just to to
make it simple um the town has
historically tried to capture the
activity of the school district within
the town's general ledger.
um that process results in duplications
of entries and sometimes those entries
um do not agree with each other. Uh so
my recommendation is that the town no
longer record or attempt to record
balances and activities that are already
being accounted for on the school
district's accounting system. Uh so that
should limit the the number of
transactions that are being recorded and
it should reduce the amount of
reconciliation that needs to be done at
year end. Um so again um the
recommendation moving forward would be
uh that the town treasurer does not
attempt to duplicate the school
district's uh trial balance on the
town's tribes.
Uh the second finding again a
significant deficiency internal control
over financial reporting on the bank and
interfund reconciliations. Um again we
did identify certain adjustments that
were needed to uh reconcile the cash and
the interfund balances. Um, again, those
adjustments were really just balance
sheet related. They didn't have an
impact on the district's overall
expenditures. Um, so again, we continue
to recommend that the school district
perform their detailed monthly
reconciliations
uh and ensure that their financial
information is complete and accurate.
Um, one of the issues that we did
identify with the reconciliations is
that there were some adjusting entries
that were recorded after the
reconciliations were done. Um, so again,
the recommendation there is that you
just go back and update those
reconciliations for any adjustments uh
that may be recorded after they were
initially performed.
Um, so Joan, I can pause here to see if
anyone has any questions on the reported
findings. I can continue through the
presentation and then just open it up to
questions at the end. Um, you let me
know what your preference is.
Michael, I appreciate that. I was
jotting down notes because I didn't
know. So, I think I think that is good.
I think we should pause right here
because I have a feeling some of the
questions will come from some of the
material you just covered. So, I'll open
it up to the board. Does anyone have any
questions to for Michael right now on
the information he just went over?
I can't see everyone, so I apologize if
um you're raising your hand or
I have a quick question procedurally. I
I don't know if this is a question for
the auditor exactly, but um does do we
typically does the board of ed typically
receive a presentation like this as well
from our auditor or is it just Yeah,
it's just the board of finance. Okay.
just looking at, you know, some of the
issues raised. It just seems like, you
know, it's the BOE needs to know about
this, too. I They will obviously, but
it's one thing to be handed a report.
It's another to hear it in a
presentation. That's why I ask. Okay.
Thanks.
Caitlyn, I see that your hand is raised.
I'm not sure if we're opening. I think
we have to have um the board of finance
ask these questions right now since it's
our meeting. Um, I know that I believe
in regards to what Rob just said that
the board of education receives the
report as well. Um,
oh, okay. Sorry, trying to keep up with
everything. I'm not used to always being
the spokesperson. Um, I wondered,
and forgive me if this is going to sound
so like um,
elementary or whatever, are you, like
you said, a lot of the problems I wrote
down the trial balance and detailed
monthly reconciliations being recorded
afterwards. Are you recommending,
Michael, that they
we actually not break away? I I know
that they have to be they have to come
together and everything has to match up
because it's the town that gives you
know that funds the money to run the
educational system and and that. So are
you saying that the town like Cheryl and
and Chris are constantly trying to play
catchup and match the records that are
there because Yeah. I'm it's all coming
back to me from prior years.
So, so in in in my mind, the the town
would account for any activities related
to the school district that impacts the
town's accounts. So, uh when the town is
funding appropriations or if they
receive um you know funding for the
board of education, um obviously those
will have some kind of of impact on the
school district side as well. So, those
things need to be reconciled. Um,
however, I I think what's been trying to
be done in the past is you get to year
end and you know, the town tries to
duplicate the trial balance that the
school district has already uh uh
basically maintained. Um, and therefore
you can end up with trying to, you know,
duplicate entries, if you will, two
accounting systems. Um, so I think the
reconciliation can be done. Um, and then
again, I think it's important that the
board of ed um continue to provide the
monthly financial information to the
town um to provide the trial balances to
the town um so they have that
information. Um again, I just don't
think they need to duplicate the entries
on the system. No, thank you for
explaining that further. Um I guess I
was going to
right because clearly now you feel
and I know it's come up from board of
finance members. I don't know if they're
going to ask the questions themselves
tonight or not, but they wish they could
have a little bit more detailed
reporting, you know, of what goes into
all of the lines, but are you feel when
you go in and you're doing the audit of,
you know, I know you see the town side
and you work with the board of ed and
their accounting software, are you
feeling like you're seeing what you need
to see there on their software or what
you work with to reconcile? I mean, I
work in a school myself, so I know the
lines that we have in budgeting things,
right? Yep. No, we see, you know, all of
their information in their general
ledger, all of their expenditures by
line item. Um, so all that information
is available. Okay. Anyone else out
there have any questions for Michael for
what we've heard so far?
I guess we're good so far. Thank you for
that pause. Thank you. Continue.
Um again we issue a number of reports.
So in addition to those reports we did
issue a federal single audit. Um
and in this uh audit report we do
actually express an opinion on the
town's compliance with your major
federal programs. So for fiscal year
2024 the total federal awards that were
expended was approximately 1.5 million.
Uh the major program was the corona
virus state and local recovery funds or
the ARPA funds. Um we did issue
unmodified clean opinions on compliance
over that program. Uh and we did not
report any significant deficiencies or
material weaknesses over grant
compliance. Um that being said, during
the course of performing our testing, we
did identify an instance of
non-compliance um that we did report um
and it related to uh failure to file the
required annual compliance report in a
timely manner. Again, that report was
subsequently filed. Um but again uh it
did not impact our opinion on the major
program. The primary compliance
requirement that is tested is allowable
cost. Um again we had no issues with the
allowable cost and therefore um the
failure to file that report did not
attack impact our opinion. Um but again
it was a required to be reported.
Uh in connection with the state single
audit we issue a similar report for
fiscal year 20 24. The total state
financial assistance that were expended
was approximately 2.6 million. Of that
about 485,000 was considered non-exempt
and subject to our audit work. Uh the
major school programs was the school
readiness uh in competitive grant
municipalities and the town a road
grants. Again, we issued unmodified
clean opinions on compliance over those
programs and we did not report any
significant deficiencies or material
weaknesses over grant compliance.
Uh, next. Yes, Joanne, I'm so sorry to
interrupt, but since it's this one page,
so were you surprised we didn't file the
correct report on the federal side? You
know, was it a big Sorry, looking at
this, it was be, you know, they didn't
report in a timely manner,
right? So, my my understanding was I
think that the the the treasur was not
aware of the requirement um at the time.
Um, so again, when we performed our
testing, we asked for the report. Um, I
think she realized at that point that it
hadn't been filed. Um, and then it was
subsequently filed. So again, from a
reporting perspective, it didn't really
have an impact. It's not like you're
going to lose funding because you didn't
file the report timely. Um, but it is a
compliance requirement. So we do have an
obligation to report it. Okay. Thank
you. And and can I ask a question? So
when you do uh have to report a finding,
what does that mean for us? What does
that mean for the town? You said it in
this case it wouldn't affect any further
funding, but what
what what are the ramifications? So this
is just a this this is a reportable
instance of non-compliance. Um it did
not have an impact on our major programs
um or our opinion. So if we modified our
opinion, that's when you could have an
impact from a federal award perspective.
Um so again, there's this is more of
justformational if you will. Um in terms
of the other findings, again, the town
will continue to have to file a corre
corrective action plan with the office
of policy and management. Um and again
could be subject to review by OPM as
well. So are there any penalties imposed
at all on this? No, there's no
penalties.
And I imagine, Michael, when these funds
come in or grants that we get, federal
funds, um, they come in with the sheet
or whatever that you have to follow and
you're given the reporting information.
Sometimes they do, yeah, sometimes they
do, sometimes they don't. Sometimes you
have to go out and find the information.
Okay. Um, so especially since these
funds were passed through the state of
Connecticut. Um, so I'm sure there was a
lot of information. Um, but sometimes
you have to kind of go through every bit
of detail to identify, you know, the
compliance requirements and so you're
saying it not all of them are the same
then every single thing could be have
different requirements for different
reporting and Yeah. Correct. Yeah. Okay.
No, thank you. One more question. So,
um, you're saying that, uh, a corrective
action plan will have to be filed,
correct? Correct. Is that something
that's done by Cheryl, by our, uh,
finance person? So, that would be
something that would be filed by Eric.
Oh, by Eric. And Okay. So, he's aware of
everything that needs to be done, right,
Eric? Correct.
And Eric, not to interrupt the maybe
later on in our meeting you can explain
maybe what this was so that you know in
board open discussion we can talk about
it like what might have happened or what
it was relayed to you know what it was
related to like how big of like which
grant or whatever but we won't stop
everything now but maybe later we can
discuss that. Yep. So Joanne just just
this this filing was related to the
Corona virus state and local fiscal
recovery funds. Okay. With this exact
Thank you. Correct. Yep. All right. Now
we know I didn't know if it you know
each one was its own. Understood. Got
it. Thank you. Yep.
All right. So the next section just goes
over your financial highlights. Um this
slide goes over your general fund.
Again, your original and final budgets
did provide for the utilization of fund
balance in the amount of 35,000 uh to
balance revenues and expenditures. Uh
your actual change in fund balance was
an increase of 372,000.
Um so that did result in an overall
favorable budgetary variance of about
47,000.
Um again, revenues and other financing
sources were approximately 227,000 more
than budgeted. Um that was really driven
by favorable collections on state aid
and interest on short-term investments.
Uh and then overall uh expenditures were
about 625,000 less than budgeted um with
the education surplus um transferred to
the 2% non-lapsing fund as well as the
school capital reserve fund. Um and so
that's where the um
actual change in fund balance of 372 uh
was derived.
We might as well stop on this page if
Could we just go back to that for one
and I won't do this every page but the
big No, that's okay. Items. That's why
I'm here. Thank you. Um, so just to
understand like I had jotted notes
before our meeting too noticing that so
you're saying we had to use the 35,000
to balance revenues and expenditures.
That was one part of it. And then I'm
assuming
35. You know, when you add this up,
there's 35 with the 407. So we really
had a favorable budgetary, you know,
surplus of 47617,
but correct we needed 35,000
of that to balance other places.
Okay. Yeah. So if just to try to explain
it, so if everything came in as you
budgeted, right, your fund balance would
have gone down 35,000. Um instead you
added 372
plus you didn't use the 35. So you end
up with kind of a favorable variance of
the 47,000. Thank you. Got it. And then
of course
Go ahead. Sorry. And then of course
going down to the last you know
um what what's that word but the last
designated thing of the the school
surplus for the past year you know for
that year for FY uh year ending 2024.
So there was a lot of talk recently as
you probably heard and we you know or it
was brought up by our board of selectmen
about the transfer that we did you know
into the school capital account now and
I mean I go to all the meetings because
I like to hear first thing you know
things firsthand and I'll try I'm gonna
ask my question briefly. I'm sure others
have thoughts too. Now, I know that this
was money that was, you know, in the
budget and it was left over for LA, you
know, I'm just talking in regular
language. So,
it had already been taxed. I know that
was a big thing at our town meetings,
too. You know, it had already been
taxed. And
we did vote as a board at the time to
transfer. You know, they were going to
do their 2% non-lapsing. Then we voted
as a board
um when the the audit amount was done to
let it get transferred into the AES
capital reserve account because that
would would have been used on some
upcoming projects. There seems to be a
lot of talk about that that maybe
I know that the AES capital fund is a
town, you know, it's held on the town,
you know, side. it's in one of those
funds that build yeartoear.
We didn't put it back into the budget or
anything like that. So, can you give us
your overall opinion on what we did or
if we were allowed to do what we did?
Yep. So, so I am aware of the the
discussion. Um, so obviously I've kind
of gone back and and looked at um you
know the procedure that um was followed
to to approve the transfer of those
funds. And so essentially you follow the
same procedure for transferring funds to
this to the AES capital fund um that you
would follow for the 2% non-lapsing
fund. Um so again I was aware um that
they had requested the board of
selectment had requested an opinion from
the attorney um and based on review of
of his opinion um and again I looked at
the statutes and I also uh looked at the
town's charter. So, um, in my view, it
doesn't seem like the town charter
addresses this specific issue. Um, so
from that perspective, I think you would
revert to to state statutes. Um, and
although state statute doesn't
specifically address this this fund, um,
I think you could um uh gain information
from other sections of the statute. So
for for example there's a statute for
capital and non-recurring funds for
municipalities
um and with a town meeting form of
government um the requirement is that
the board of finance make a
recommendation to town meeting and then
town meeting ultimately approve the
transfer. Um, so again, I think um, you
know, you you would have to discuss
internally. If that's something that you
would would potentially want to, you
know, self-correct. Um, if the boards
ultimately are are okay with it, then,
you know, maybe it's it's moving
forward. I saw the the attorney had made
a recommendation to maybe adopt an
ordinance to specifically address it. Um
but again I think you know the issue
probably relates to the fact that this
is a newer fund and we also Michael just
I mean it had been talked about publicly
so often you know over the years it was
very transparent not that that's we want
to do the correct things that's why
we're asking you for your you know
opinion and I know it's been a hot
ticket item at the board of selectman
meeting and we listen to them and the
only thing that we also were thinking
about was or myself, speaking for
myself, cuz going to all the different
meetings, it had been spoken about. It
had been put up on, you know, put up at
our town meeting. Um, and I understand
you're not here to to talk about the
politics of it. We really do value your
opinion and that's why I wish Cheryl was
here too, not I understand people have
to miss meetings. Just that that we're
all together hearing the same things. I
just feel like it's so important and
that's why I make myself go to all these
meetings so that I hear it firsthand and
try to comprehend. Um, yeah. So, I mean,
it seems like it went up and and I've
seen the town attorney give two
different opinions that on the same
subject and I'm not I think he's great.
I think he's funny. I like listening to
him. He's a great guy. So it's not being
judgmental about him, but I've seen that
dated that the Yeah, I mean it's
difficult. Yeah, you can see it. You can
see it at the federal level as well. Um,
you know, regulations, statutes, they
are subject to interpretation. Um,
sometimes I review statutes and you
know, I could see someone reading it
three different ways. Um, so again, I
would typically recommend
um that you defer to your town attorney
um because ultimately he would be the
one that would, you know, defend you uh
in in any potential lawsuit. Um um we
certainly don't want to get to that
thing. You know,
it wasn't done for those intentions or
whatever. So, we are trying to get to
the bottom of it. No, thank you for I
have a question. Um go ahead. I know the
board of selectmen um did statement that
um they feel that it was done
incorrectly the transfer and are you
obligated as the as the auditor to
correct that if the board of selectment
states that it was done incorrectly
or is it the board of finance that needs
to make that determination or is it
both?
It it would be both. I mean the when we
talk about financial statements, these
are the town's financial statements and
that includes all boards um and town
officials. So ultimately internally you
you would have to make that
determination
and then we would come to you to do what
needs to be done. Correct. Okay. And
then you said we should default to
whatever the town attorney you you
suggest or would recommend, which is
smart. Um because he covers all things,
you know. Um yeah, because as you know,
just to wrap it all up so that we don't
talk about it for too too long because
we'll talk about it again. It sounds
like, you know, they did take a vote at
the board of selectmen meeting the last
time and like you had mentioned, they
talked about maybe going forward, you
know, because I think I don't I don't
think they had the votes to do maybe
what they wanted to do and, you know, it
was brought up that it's been talked
about at town meetings and so there was
a little bit of a gray area and even the
town attorney was on the call, too. So,
I guess we'll have to stay, you know, so
he weighed in again. Um, and people had
plenty of questions. So, ultimately the
board of finance for the town of Andover
wants to do the right thing. So, we
thought we were, you know, or had no
idea with that. And the suggestion was
where the money was going was a fund for
the school. So, it seemed Yeah. So,
we'll wait and see. Yeah. And and again,
I understand this is kind of a new fund
for the town. So procedurally um again I
I understand that the it was um done you
know in in good gest um it's not
something that I identified as as being
an issue. Um so again once I became
aware of it and kind of looked into it
more um again that would be you know my
opinion um you know being a town meeting
form of government. uh and if you you
know follow some of the other u examples
um within statute but again the the
state you know it's one of the things
for um how they changed that process for
the the 2% non-lapsing fund. Um so again
that's a specific statute that they um
authorized that kind of overrode that
process of of getting that legislative
approval. Um, and so I'm thinking that
you probably can't apply that to the
capital reserve fund unless it was
specifically stated within the statute.
Got it. Anyone else with questions on
this issue?
Okay, thank you so much for the time on
that.
Um, so the next slide goes over your
governmental fund financial highlights.
Um so overall the town reported combined
ending fund balances of about 5.1
million. Um that was an increase of
about 1.1 million from the prior year.
Um again the about 1.8 million was in
your general fund. So that was an
overall increase of about 372,000.
180,000 of that had been assigned for
use in your fiscal year 2025
budget. Uh that left a remaining
unassigned fund balance of about 1.6 6
million. Um that represents
approximately 13.1%
of your general fund budgetary
appropriations and that was sufficient
to cover just over a month and a half of
your general fund budgetary
expenditures. Um so again the
recommendation from the GFOA is that
municipalities maintain a um reserve of
approximately two months. Um so you are
below that threshold. Um however you
know you do need to kind of factor in
some of your capital related reserves as
well. uh because those could always be
repurposed if needed uh in an emergency
or those sorts of situations. So, um the
town was reporting an ending combined
fund balance in the capital reserve
funds of about 1.7 million. Um that was
an increase of about 655,000 from the
prior year and that's primarily driven
uh from budgetary transfers to fund your
various reserves. Um so again, those
amounts are committed for for capital
purposes. Um the town was reporting uh
three deficits in fund balances. Uh so
there's a small deficit in the
transportation transfer station shed
repair. Um there's a $64,000 deficit in
the equipment reserve fund and there was
a $13,000 deficit in the building
maintenance reserve fund. Again, based
on my discussions with Eric, uh it was
just a timing issue and and the
transfers were being made in fiscal year
2025 to cover some of those those
deficits.
Uh and then all of the other funds of
the town totaled approximately 1.5
million uh which was an increase of
about 101,000 from the prior year. And
again all of those amounts are either
restricted or committed for uh various
purposes. And again there are detailed
schedules within the financial
statements uh that show the activity for
all of the town's individual funds.
Um this last section just goes over our
required communications. The first item
here talks about our responsibility
under the auditing standards. Um again
although we assist in the preparation of
the financial statements, they are the
responsibility of the town. Um it's our
responsibility to perform our procedures
and express our opinions on those
financial statements. Uh in terms of the
plan scope and timing the audit, again
no changes in the overall scope of work.
Um there were multiple expens extensions
that were requested from OPM. uh those
delays uh really resulted from a delay
in the commencement of the audit. So
again, we're scheduled to perform the
audit uh after the 1231 uh filing
deadline. Um and then there were some
additional delays in obtaining the
required disclosure reports for the
town's other post-employment benefits
liability. Uh so ultimately that uh
extended the audit out probably another
month, month and a half. Uh in terms of
significant audit findings, again there
were no new accounting standards that
were implemented that had a significant
effect on the financial statements. Um
the financial statements do include some
significant estimates and judgments. Uh
those consist of estimated useful lives
that are assigned to capital assets and
then discount rates that are utilized to
determine your net pension and OPED
liabilities. Again, we did review those
estimates. We did deem them to be
reasonable and consistent with what
other municipalities are utilizing.
I'm happy to report that we had no
significant difficulties encountered in
dealing with management. Uh we had no
uncorrected misstatements. So any
adjustments that were identified were
proposed and reflected in the financial
statements. Uh we had no disagreements
with management. Uh we did obtain a
management representation letter. Again,
there were no unusual representations
that were requested by us. Um and again
uh if during the course of performing
the audit we were unable to substantiate
a transaction that we had selected for
testing um and we were relying on a
representation from management we would
disclose that to you as the board. Um
and again we're not aware of any
management consultations with any other
independent accountants. Uh if there
were consultations we would have to uh
have a discussion with those accountants
and we would have to make that
communication to the board as well. Um
so with that that concludes the the
audit presentation and really covers the
the results of the audit and the reports
that were issued. Um I know we had
talked about you know questions as we
went along but again happy to answer
your questions at any point in time.
I have one more. Can you go back two
slides? Two slides about the delays.
Um, do you have any recommendations like
or can you clarify more where the delays
like if there was a bottleneck where
where it was and what can we do to
um yeah again Yep. So, so right now the
town we we do um schedule the audit to
be performed on extension just from a
capacity perspective. Um, and just so
the board is aware, um, I think over 50%
of the municipalities in Connecticut
file on extension. Um, so there the, um,
there's not enough governmental
auditors, uh, that have the experience
to do the audits. Um, there's really
only, uh, probably four or five firms
that do the audits. Um, and as a result,
there's just not the capacity to get
everybody uh, filed by the 1231
deadline. Um so initially those
extensions were as a result of the audit
being scheduled on extension. Um and
again OPM does not um penalize a
municipality for filing on extension um
until after the following fiscal year.
So again if you didn't get your audit
issued by June 30th 2025
um then that might be an issue for u for
OPM. uh and that would typically be a
result of not the auditor but probably
issues uh within the audit itself. Um
but again we had some additional delays
um due to um the disclosure report from
the actuary for the other
post-employment benefit liability. Uh
the information I guess maybe wasn't
provided to the actuary in in a timely
manner. As a result, it took them longer
to get the disclosure report back. So
that's something I've already discussed
with Eric uh for future years. Um, so
again, I I I don't think that should be
an issue going forward.
Thank you. Thank you, Michael, for that.
I guess I had a follow-up question for
Liz, just that I know that we are aware
as a board that, you know, there aren't
enough of the m the governmental
auditors to go around and so we're on
your schedule at a certain point. And
then I it's been great to see that each
year it's gotten done a little bit
quicker. I understand that, you know,
just the capacity of everything that has
to be done. So, it's nice to hear, too.
I think I I'm withholding tonight
understanding that there's no penalties
um until after a full fiscal year
behind. So, um we're glad that we're on
your schedule and then it's getting
hopefully, you know, year after year
that Cheryl's been involved with you and
then it seems to be getting smoother. Um
the one thing that you did have um I
think it involved estimates. Can we just
go back real quick to that? Um I think
it might be
Do you feel like are you saying in our
budget there's a lot of Okay. Estimates
discount rates. Yeah. So I I should
clarify. So the significant estimates
and judgments are really on on the full
acral basis of accounting. So that's
that's your governmentwide financial
statements. Okay. Um, so that does not
impact your your budgets. Um, that's
some additional information that
external users may use such as like bond
rating companies or OPM to evaluate some
of your liabilities, your long-term
liabilities. Um, but those don't have a
direct impact on your fund financial
statements or on your budget. Okay.
Thanks. I didn't know if it involved us
estimating too many. Got it. Um, we have
members of So, I want to ask our board
of finance, um, a question. I have no
problem with, it looks like Caitlyn,
uh, she's the board of ed, um, board
chair, would like to ask the auditor a
question. I have no problem with that. I
mean, they're taking time out of their
night to come join this meeting. So, um,
is anybody opposed to any questions
being asked since Michael's here? I
think it's great that they're taking an
interest in, you know, coming. So,
obviously, they have an interest. Sorry,
Caitlyn. But go ahead, Caitlyn. Go
ahead, unmute yourself and ask your
question for the auditor.
Okay. Thank you again. I'm sorry. Um, so
I have a couple questions also. Um, one
is specifically about um, in terms of
the town reconciliation on a monthly
basis, what reporting are you are you
recommending that the board of ed give
to the town on a monthly basis? Is a
summary report okay? Do you want bank
statements? Like can you be specific on
what we should be sending on a monthly
basis? Yeah. So my recommendation would
be um you know from a financial
reporting perspective
your you know your budget to actual
reports uh that the board of education
would receive. Um so again I know those
are made available via the board of
education minutes. Um but I think you
know those can certainly be passed along
to the town as well. Um, I also think
it's probably appropriate for um the
town business manager to provide the
bank reconciliations and the trial
balance uh on a monthly basis to to the
town treasurer. Um, again, um, it's kind
of that oversight function, if you will.
Um, you know, so that's that's the
information that I would recommend gets
provided. Okay. So, so just to summarize
that, you're saying like our our
budgetary reports that those are already
sent and then also uh bank account
statements as well on a monthly basis.
Is that what you're asking? To the to
the town treasurer. Correct. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. But I think for the board of
finance um uh again I think just the the
budget to actual reports would be
sufficient. Okay. Um thank you. And then
um my other question is uh really in
regards to this whole thing about the
the capital fund for the school that was
created. Um
what happens with money at the end of
our
school year that we end up wanting to
transfer or to to possibly go into that
capital account. um to some degree if if
we have money left over because we were
able to pay for things with grants,
it would greatly affect our budget for
the future year if we have a giant
capital project pending and we don't
have enough money for it. Like we would
have to put that in our next school year
budget because we don't have a separate
capital budget. So, I guess I'm I know
Joanne and everyone's saying like we
have to wait to see what we're going to
end up doing, but I I just I just hope
and I guess I'm asking for your opinion
on what we should be doing regarding
that because there's more ramifications
about what happens to that money and how
it affects a future budget. Um, because
we don't have a separate capital budget.
Caitlyn, I don't mean to intercept. I
mean, and Michael can answer that as
well. I mean, we're asking his opinion
on what's done with the balances and the
accounting at the end of the year. I
think it's going to be townwide. I, you
know,
again, I spoke publicly that I'm in
favor of it because I understand there's
a lot of projects that are coming up and
I thought it was great that the money
that was left over would be put in an
account for that. I mean, I'll let him
speak to it, but I don't want to get too
far off of what we should do as a town.
I don't know. You know, I we want to
keep the subject tonight for asking
questions about this audit. Yeah. Um,
you know, and as you know, because
there's been a lot going on every single
town meeting things come up. So, but
I'll I'll step away, but we want to kind
of keep it
the future. I mean, I just want to ask
for the future like are and I just want
to make sure that I'm hearing it
correctly. You're you're recommending
obviously to do what the town attorney
says, but that board of finance would
make a recommendation and then it would
go to the town meeting to approve a
transfer of excess money that is over
the 2% in order to go to the capital
fund.
Oh, thank you for rephrasing. Now I
understand what you're asking. I'm
sorry. That's okay. I'm sorry. Can you
just repeat that one more time? Sorry.
Yeah. So, and I and I'm trying to
paraphrase. So, I thought what you said
was follow what the town attorney says,
but basically that the board of finance
um like board of ed would ask board of
finance and then board of finance would
make a recommendation about what to do
with that extra money to go to the
capital fund and then if they said yes,
then we would have a town meeting to
approve the transfer of that money into
the capital fund for the school.
Correct. Okay. Yeah. And again, you
know, there's 169 municipalities in the
state of Connecticut. We do over um you
know, 25 municipalities and um they all
kind of handle it differently. So, I
don't want to necessarily um you know,
tell you that you have to do it a
certain way. I mean, obviously, capital
uh planning is important. Um, a lot of
towns, the board of education is part of
the town's overall capital, um,
improvement process, um, if you will,
but we do have towns that have separate
capital funds specifically for the board
of education. Um, so again, it's it's
not necessarily, you know, um, you know,
one size kind of fits all. Okay. Thank
you very much.
Hey, anyone else on the board of finance
have any further questions about the
audit? um results from fiscal year 2024.
All right, seeing none, um Michael,
thank you so much for your time tonight.
Um it's been great watching things, you
know, get streamlined, understanding
things a little bit more. Um and
appreciate, you know, you Yeah, I do
think big I I Joan, I do think big
picture this year's audit was um much
more efficient than than prior year's
audit. Um, again, I know we have uh
findings that we've reported, but a lot
of those findings were not as uh
significant as the findings that were
reported in the prior year. Um, so
again, I hope to see, you know,
continued improvement.
Great. We do too. As do we. Yes. Yeah.
It's nice to hear that we're improving
on multiple fronts. That's good. Right.
And thanks for educating us too along
the way because we definitely want to do
things in the correct way and and all of
that, too. So, we appreciate that.
Okay. So, I think I think we're all set.
All right. Thank you very much. I
appreciate it. Thank you. Thank you for
your time. Thanks for your time.
Okay, everyone. Um, so we'll move on.
Um, unless anyone, you know, we could
discuss things later, but I mean, I
think we all had the opportunity to ask
the questions we wanted to, um, and and
understand it a little better. And I
think it's important that we have this
every year. Um I think we skipped a
year. I remember going in person a
couple years ago when um you know trying
to get an understanding of everything.
All right. So moving on to number five,
Eric. That would be your town
administrator report.
Sure. So I put the report in the packet.
Um, we are going to go through some
employee transition both in public works
and with the senior transportation
drivers on top of the transitions that
we're experiencing with the community
center. So, we're in a period right now
of uh a fair bit of employee turnover.
Um, are there other questions related to
my report or things that you want me to
go over?
No, I saw it. I mean, you know me, I'm
always going to ask this question and
I'm sorry that you're losing employees
at this time. I mean, um, I saw your
thoughts that you were, are you going to
follow just again, you're the boss, so
I'm just asking the question, are you
going to follow the procedure of the
union? It sounds like you're not posting
for a lead maintainer, the number three,
you know, the level three. you want to
promote the the gentleman that was a one
to a two. I mean, I would just ask if
you were even if in theory I understand
it's all going to result in the same
thing, but for the town since it's a job
that I do, are you just posting the two
so the gentleman would bid on the number
two and that's how he's going to get
promoted?
No, I'm just promoting them to maintain
it too with the permission of the board
of selecting.
Does that have to get like permission? I
don't know. It just doesn't follow any
union ethics that I've ever been a part
of. So, I just wanted to since you put
it in our packet, I understand that's
what's going to happen, but isn't there
a procedure
like So, or did the I do have a
discussion scheduled with the union
attorney on Monday,
um the asks me attorney. Um, but
there the town has the right to make a
determination to promote an individual
employer. There's nothing in the
contract that says what the conditions
are for promoting an employer or an
employee in that realm. Part of the
issue is Mark will be in charge of the
public works department um as of Friday.
So I cannot have a maintainer one um in
charge of a department that only has
maintainer twos plus him. So he is
getting promoted to the same pay grade
as the remaining maintainers that will
in a sense work for him um until an
interim or a new public works supervisor
is hired. So that's part of the
rationale for it. He is by far the
senior person I have in terms of
experience even though he's only I
understand you know from going to all
the meetings he sounds like he's very
qualified and you know no I just from a
you gave us that in the packet and he is
a union employee so I needed to ask that
because it wasn't language that I'm
familiar with so I feel like as the
board of finance we just have to ask
that question um thank you that's my
only question.
Uh the only other kind of things that
are big news that will uh affect things
is that
um the state of Connecticut is pushing
the timeline for the long hill bridge
replacement up that will begin next
April. So we are delaying the
replacement of the Lake Road Bridge
right near Basola for one year because
we don't have the financial ability to
manage both or the bandwidth frankly to
manage both of those projects at once.
So 2026 will be the long hill bridge
replacement. 27 will be the replacement
of the lake road bridge. Both those are
scheduled for a one construction season
project.
Um the only other good news is
we did get a legislative grant uh Oh
yeah. in the next two years, $250,000 a
year for two years. Uh that is
there to help pay for the recreational
field improvements. So that's quite nice
to see. That's huge. that takes some of
the the burden off of uh funding that um
we got a series of other smaller uh
grants recently from the Hartford
Foundation for public giving. Um
so that's about everything I have that's
budget related as far as my report goes.
Great job on that grant, Eric.
Um,
yeah, if we were in executive session, I
would talk more about that, but but
yeah, I'm happy we got it and I really
appreciate uh MD Ramen going back for
us. Um, on huge. Eric, can I ask you're
talking about that's going to be used
for where the playground and the pickle
ball courts are coming because I thought
we had for that already. We do have a
different grant for that. now and I
drove by the other day because I don't
live far from there. Um,
and that's a little bit on delay right
now clearly, right? I think you had said
something in your report because public
works was going to be part of the Yeah.
So, one of the things we're going to do
with that is we're going to switch it
from a self-managed project to using the
Capitol Region Council of Government's
EasyIQC
uh purchasing uh program.
um which is a
arrangement where the the
uh the capital region goes out once a
year for competitive bid across a range
of construction categories. Um and they
free bid by item. So they have an agreed
on schedule of exactly what your costs
are across most of the range of normal
construction tasks. So when you come up
to something, you know, that is already
pre-bid. All you do is you sit down and
work out with Gordian, who's the
oversight group, and the contractor,
exactly what the quantities of each
thing you want, and then out pops the
the bid for it. Um, it's a program the
state really likes. cuts down a lot on
our management of it because you have
the Gordian group who's already paid off
essentially state funds to oversee some
of these. Um, so we're going to do that.
That will probably increase our costs
somewhat, frankly, because every general
contractor, you know, has overhead and
profit built into theirs. And if the
town's not the general contractor, then
we have to accept that.
But since we have enough money to cover
it, it's a lot smarter because we'll be
able to get do it now. Frankly, with
only three people left in public works,
um we don't have the capacity to do it
right now anyway. So, this is the only
way we're getting it done anytime soon,
if that makes sense.
Got it. And what's have any questions
for Eric? Yeah, I do. So, what's the
timeline looking like? What's the
timeline looking like for that, Eric? I
would starting I'm guessing we're going
to be in construction at some point in
the fall. Not sure exactly when.
Um Okay.
I think we'll have a a reasonable
contract
hammered out in six or seven weeks and
then you know we go through state
approvals process which should go
quicker because it's easy IQC and they
deal with uh
uh CHRO we don't have to deal with the
commission on human rights and then we
should be off and running and then we're
just you know it's just dependent on how
fast the contractor can get in there to
the work.
And you you mentioned we could get more
information in executive session about
these
uh
um
grants. Is that something worthwhile? If
you want to talk about the legislative
grant, we do that in executive session.
Um is it is anybody else interested in
that? I'm kind of interested in that.
Well, I mean, I'd like to get through
the rest of our agenda and then we could
maybe have a quick executive session at
the end of the meeting. Um, and because
I just think it's important that we all
the info and we don't have all of our
members, but yeah, but I don't know able
to add that. Eric, is that protocol? We
should have added it at the beginning.
You can add it. You can vote to go
session at any time you want. So at the
end you just make a motion to go into an
executive state session. So we'll wait
till we get through and then we'll make
a motion at the end.
All right. So I'm going to go ahead I
just ask a quick question for just
something about the the bridge project
the long hill bridge. Eric um your
report says it got kind of moved up and
stuff. Is that because the condition
the state was basically like look we're
going to shut the bridge down if you
don't do this now. Is that what
happened? No, it's it's not that. It's
that the state is worried about losing,
you know, federal funds and everything
they can push up, they will push up. Got
it. Um, and this one is unique in that
it does not require any takings. Um, and
that means the state does not and the
town does not have to acquire any land
or any easements to make this happen
because it's already got a wide enough
rightway there. And because of that,
they think they can punch this one up
one year sooner than they expect. So,
they fasttracked it. Okay, got it.
Thanks. Yep.
Can I also ask you can I also ask you,
Eric, what is Easy IQC project? What
does that mean?
So, EasyIQC,
and they're actually renaming it or
rebranding it, but it's basically um
for instance, on a big construction
project, you normally go out to bid. Uh
you do an RFP and you go out to RFP for
the project, right? Um, and then you
know, you sit there, you interview six
or seven companies, you make a decision
what you want. Um, EasyIQC
is
kind of like a pre-bid arrangement and
by that I mean um, annually the Capital
Region Council of Governments um, in the
state, not just the capital region, all
the regions go out in a combined RFP
um, and they competitively bid
construction projects
um, based on unit cost. And by unit
cost, let's say you you were putting in
sidewalks. Um, a sidewalk would be so
much money per square yard of material
excavated, so much money per square yard
of concrete, um, based on, you know, the
unit amount you're putting in. So, by
pre-bidding all of these and knowing
what you're going to pay for each task
and each quantity ahead of time, you're
essentially pre-bidding the project. Um,
and it takes a lot of the guesswork out
of the project and just cuts down on the
time it takes to execute those.
Um, the town's done it before with the
connectivity grant project um and came
in under budget on that one. Had real
good success with that. Um, New Britain
just did their new public works
facility, did a $25 million project
through EasyIQC bidding. So, um, it's
very popular. It's done in a lot of
towns. It's just a way of doing
something, um, that makes the logistics
easier.
Okay. Thank you. Yep.
I guess we'll move on to if that's it
for Eric right now, we'll move on to old
business number six. Um we'll go over
the review of budget to actual
um fourth quarter review of overall
budget trends. I don't know if anyone
has any questions regarding the um
budget to actual for Eric.
I was focusing on the audit so I didn't
real I mean I did glance at it but um
yeah I don't myself have any questions
but anybody feel free.
So um if you want a detailed rundown I
had uh Chris run me the uh budget to
actual as of today. Um, we've probably
had the last run of checks we're going
to have before the
uh July 1st.
Um, it will not include the last payroll
and it does not include all of the the
journal entries that Cheryl uh needs to
put in. But the the bottom line is we're
fiscally solid. the majority of
uh departments
are under budget. There's there are some
department departments as a whole that
are over budget, but um on average we're
in pretty good shape. Um, right now
on the town side, there's about 330K
under budget so far. However, we still
have the 26th pay period to go. So, that
will be about 50,000 in payroll, um,
around 6,000 in MURF, around 9,000 in
healthcare. We have a roughly $10,000
bill for elevator repair. Um, so with
those taken in, that gets us, the best
guess right now is we're going to be
underspent by about $250,000.
That will come down further because, as
you know, even though the fiscal year uh
closes July 1, the bills that we get
that are dated earlier than July 1, and
they often trickle in in July, in the
first week or so of August, will get
paid out of last fiscal year. So, um,
Eric, are you sorry, are you like you
just said, and I understand that for the
fiscal year ending July, June 30th,
correct? Everything should be, you know,
ordered or services rendered in that
fiscal year. So, are you and you just
made a statement saying obviously those
things it they shouldn't have a July 1
date on their invoice, right? Or a date
before July 1, June 30th or earlier,
right? Right. Okay. So, you're just
saying you're expecting invoices for
services and goods that were ordered to
come in and then of course, right, we
understand that the books won't totally
be closed because you have to make all
those adjustments and pay all those
bills and whatever. Correct. Okay.
Correct. And on the the revenue side, uh
we're in pretty good shape right now. Uh
um
overall we're slightly less
than as of when we did the last
reconciliation.
We were about $60,000 less in total
revenue. Um but we're actively doing
transfer station permits and that's not
the last of what we're going to get out
of the tax collector's office. So my
guess is by the end of the year that's
going to be pretty close to zero on
revenues. Right now we're about point
0.5%
under in the in our revenue forecast. So
pretty good revenue forecast. Um so
fiscally we're okay for last year.
There's no there's no chance we're going
to end up in the red, you know, uh for
last year. Great. Sounds good.
All right, without further questions on
that, thank you for that because I know
we have another item down below where
we're going to talk about possible
transfers or, you know, I don't even
know if you're at that stage yet. But,
um, moving on to item B, which is the
check register. Any questions from
anyone there?
Yeah, I don't think we got the check
register. Sorry, I didn't I usually
print it out. So, again, the focus was
other things. Um, so maybe we didn't
even have it in our packet.
So I would like you mentioned that
report that Chris ran today. I mean, if
you send it to us like in the next
couple days, that would be great to just
take a look at it ahead of time when you
have time. All right, so moving on from
the check register. No questions there.
Um, I did send you an email regarding
the next item, which was the OSHA item
C, OSHA update. I know we got the memo
from you stating, you know, what the
fines were going to be and it looks like
you were able to negotiate or something
and it looks like the fines are going to
be half of what they should have been
just in my quick math. But we Yeah, we
got the fines down to about $2,100,
which is fantastic for a municipality in
multiple buildings. I I can tell you
that, you know, um most of our neighbors
have paid fines that were more than an
order of magnitude uh greater than that.
So that's awesome as far as I looked
through the minutes of some and you had
you had forecasted that they could be
very very high, you know, some of the
numbers that were thrown out. So, yes,
seeing 2,000, but I, you know, I'll take
it up at another meeting, but I it would
be great to see what they were the fines
were for. I mean, there was like, you
know, they weren't obviously, and it's
the board of select men's duty, not
ours, to manage, you know, those kind of
things. We're just the the money side of
it. So, I just didn't see it saying what
they were for. Uh, all of those are
posted on the appropriate building. The
town hall's violations are posted on the
town hall's notice board. Public works
is posted there. Library is posted there
and transfer stations posted on theirs.
Um, got it. That's what OSHA wants. I
know we always have to post OSHA. Okay.
All right. Anyone have any questions
about the fine to the OSHA update?
I don't have any questions, but Eric,
great job getting those fines down.
Thank you.
Yeah, I was pretty happy with that
actually. Yeah, compared to that
taxpayers.
Yes, definitely. Okay, moving on to item
number seven, new business. Um, item A
was the tax collector suspense report.
Eric, do you have or does anyone have
questions on it? I know it was in our
packet and I know I mean just I need to
just again praise our tax collector.
Boy, she really has done some awesome
work like since she's taken over with
everything she's doing. Um I know it's
not our job to do that but wow it's you
know rolling along or maybe possible tax
sales or you know so she's getting the
taxes collected which is the main thing.
Doing a great job.
So, anyone questions on that?
Okay, moving on to Okay, we're going on
to new business under item B that I had
thought maybe we would strike, but I did
put it on um I've already spoken to it.
Obviously, everyone, you know, was
spoken about it tonight again that at a
recent board of selectmen meeting or
um you know, the topic came up and Mr.
Maguire had had mentioned that,
you know, things weren't done correctly
or, you know, brought it to the board of
Select's attention. So, I wanted
I was at that meeting. I spoke to it
there. I mean, we we heard from our
auditor tonight, which I think is good
that he gives us some guidance. Um,
obviously, as the board of finance, we
always want to do the correct things and
follow. Um, it just bothers me, I guess,
that maybe there's been a couple
contradictory opinions by the town
attorney of what we can do. But again,
we have to do what we have to do. Um,
does anyone have any thoughts? You all
wanted to keep this on the agenda. I
guess the one question I did want to ask
the board of finance straight, was this
the first you heard of it or did any of
you have concerns and possibly had gone
to Mr. Maguire or did you bring it to
this forum which is the board of finance
forum? So
anyone go ahead. I can only speak for
myself in that you know if I thought
this was the wrong procedure I wouldn't
have done what I did you know working on
this. Uh I read the town attorney's
opinion. Um it goes on for some length.
Uh and I got the gist of it. He thinks
we did the wrong thing. I get it. Um
I on at the end of the day I don't want
to be in a position where we as a board
overstep or try to take on powers that
we don't have. Uh so that's I felt the
whole thing was kind of unfortunate that
it went you know came down that way. But
if that's the take,
uh, you know, I guess the question that
I have going forward becomes this. Is
the appropriate procedure as we
discussed tonight that we make a
recommendation
then we go to town meeting and do we
have to have a separate town meeting for
that or is it if we bless it and then
the board of selectman blesses it, are
we good? and that and you know when we
looked at the backing way up when we
looked at the charter provisions and the
state statutes uh you know trying to
figure out a process here
I remember reading the state state
statutes and feeling like they none of
them were directly on point.
Uh and the auditor I feel like kind of
alluded to that. Um but I also admit I'm
not a lawyer. I work with them all the
time, but I'm not myself one. And it's
entirely possible that I misinterpreted
something or missed something that was
key. So my gut reaction is, okay, if
this isn't the process, then then we
revise and that's fine by me. But uh it
was a good faith effort. That's all. And
I did not, you know, personally raise
objections because I thought it was the
right thing. So I thought we were doing
okay. So that's that's from my
perspective. That's all I've got.
I totally agree with fraud. Same thing.
We thought we were doing what we were
supposed to be doing, but when it got to
a point where there was an indication
that it might have been done
incorrectly,
I want to do the right thing as well. So
if we have to go to town meeting for it,
we'll have to do that.
Yeah. Yeah. I don't know where it stands
or who makes that call or whatever. I we
all want to do the right thing and I
mean it was simply you know money that
was going to be put in a fund to do work
that's going to have to be done and paid
by the taxpayers anyways eventually. So
um what I got out of tonight Liz and
then I'll let you speak. Um what I got
out of tonight was he sort someone
clearly brought it to his attention and
he's the auditor and that's good. I mean
we all want the things to go right. Um,
like Rob said and all I said and I've
spoke up in every meeting was just that
this was so darn transparent because
there were so many meetings like Rob,
you and Shannon were talking about it.
We were trying to go to the board of
selectmen and have it approved and then
they didn't want any part of it. I mean,
there's been multiple meetings, but
again, none of that really matters now.
We all know that it was all in good
faith. The auditor said he thought it
was, you know, trying to do a good thing
or, you know, the right thing or, you
know, it Yeah. So, again, everybody else
say what they I don't know where this
stands. I don't think they had a
resolution at the other meeting. They
had a vote with what they were going to
do. So,
Liz, do you want to Yeah. So my take on
this is it it is unfortunate that there
was so much talk about this um
throughout the year and that nobody
suggested that maybe there's a step that
we're missing. But my take on the way
that it makes sense to me and that it
needs to be handled is these are tax
dollars that taxpayers have already or
these are dollars that the taxpayers
have already paid.
So to me it makes sense.
It's it's our job to fund the various
accounts that need to get funded over
the course of the year. So obviously
these these things need to be taken care
of at the school. So this is no
different than taking care of whatever
the trucks and whatever that need to be
funded for the town. So if that money
goes back to the general fund, we then
which would be the legal way to do it.
We as the board of finance then properly
make a decision how much some all
partial how much of that money do we
fund going forward for uh for that
capital fund because obviously we have
to budget for it and I think that's what
the part that was missed is that
it's our job to budget for it. Um
and and I think maybe that's the part
that was missed.
And since that money, um somebody stood
up in the town budget meeting and even
said that, you know, I've already paid
money on those taxes or I already paid
taxes on that money.
um which made sense to me
and I'm probably not saying this right,
but the point is regardless of of what
happens with the money, it's our job to
see that these capital projects get
funded just like any other capital
building in the town. So, we have to
plan that during budget season anyways.
Does that make sense? appreciate that
comment. That meant a lot to me, too.
The woman that spoke up said that the
money had already been taxed and so that
kind of changes my mind about using the
fund balance every year to reduce
people's taxes in general. you know, we
like landed on that was a very good
point she made, but I also thought I
don't think we were having her get
reaxed by putting it in the AES capital
fund because that's one of those
standalone funds. I'm not supporting nor
denying it. Made me feel good that she
wouldn't get retaxed. I mean, people
were trying to say, "Oh, they're putting
it back in the budget." What bothers me
is I think I'm going to have a whole new
perspective on things of how much of the
fund gen, you know, fund balance I want
to use to decrease people's taxes
because it is true this money that was a
surplus has been taxed already on the
taxpayers. We should use as much of that
as possible to reduce future taxes for
the people. Correct. So, correct. not
even having anything to do with our
general. I'm with you, Liz, because like
we stopped at 190 and listen, I was
throwing all kinds of ideas out there.
We put the 150 to reduce and then we
added the 40 that should have been in
the year before. So, we reduced by 190
this year. So, in my mind, I think I'm
pro use as much as we can in the future
just because of that woman's statement.
It meant a lot to me. Yep. That's all. I
don't Kim, you wanted this to be on the
agenda moving forward to discuss. Did do
you want to say something?
Um, no. I was just curious why it was
back on the agenda, but it sounds like
it's been covered. Um, I appreciate all
the comments. Thank you. Yeah. And Eric,
do you know where we stand? I mean,
that's all we can go. I mean,
I wanted to have a, you know, I just
think we needed to have a a discussion
about it. I'm sure it'll be ongoing.
Maybe it will affect how we budget in
the future
um with things that are added. I don't I
don't know. But what where do you feel
like this stands right now, Eric? I
thought at the board of selectman
meeting
it didn't pass to go to town meeting. I
don't know.
uh they did not have enough of a
uh support to they did not vote to send
it to town meeting. So at this point I I
mean unless the board of finance
recommended that it goes to town meeting
it's kind of dead for what's happened so
far. Um, that doesn't mean,
you know, and and from my perspective,
our governing documents, our charter,
you know, there's a lot of things in
there that I think are vague. Um, I'm
not sure I agree with the town's
attorney's opinion on that, but I
respect that he's the town attorney and
I'm just the administrator and if he
says water is green, then water his
legal opinion is that water's green and
I abide by it. Um,
you know, that's just the way it works.
That's his responsibility as the town's
attorney.
So what I would suggest is that what you
focus on is what to do going forward and
come up with the policies and
procedures,
you know, to make this clear. And if
that takes a town ordinance and going to
a public meeting to establish an
ordinance on how to do this, then do so.
because I I will tell you that I'm still
confused after doing this for six years
about what is the exact procedure for
getting a capital project through from
soup to nuts. Do I go through CIP and
then go to board of finance because the
board of selectman has to say on money
that's already budgeted or do I go CIP,
board of selectman, board of finance?
There doesn't seem to be any real logic
to um and I've done it both ways in the
past and the board of finance has de or
the board of selectmen has definitely
approved capital projects and gave me my
marching orders to execute that without
really asking the board of finance to
because it was already budgeted money.
So I think we got a lot of procedural
work to figure out
how to do it. I I would be much happier
to have a clean roadmap of how this is
done. Um, you know, we have a capital a
a a
spending policy and that's good, but it
doesn't really explain what the process
is to get to that spending. Sounds good.
Eric, Rob, did you want to add
something? Yeah, I mean, again, I would
just say that, you know, on the one
hand, you know, I would never advise us
to ignore the advice of legal counsel.
That's the whole point of having it. Uh
what I would say is that the question in
my mind that was raised was is it really
town meeting or is it a meeting of the
minds between board of finance and board
of selectment? Uh and that's something
I'd like to explore further. Maybe we
can direct that question back to town
council.
Um because town meeting of course is a
whole process of its own. It costs money
to do. We have to set it up. we have to
get people there. Um, and it's it's
also, you know, could the board of
selectment is the executive board of the
town, right? We're we're just the
finance board, but you know, they get to
make a lot of decisions uh without
having a meeting for a townwide meeting
for everything. And so that's where I'm
that's where I'm at is that's my
question is can we solve this issue by
having us recommend and board of
selectment agreeing or disagreeing and
then we go forward.
That's my gut. But you know I it just
struck me as
difficult to manage if we have to do
town meeting and therefore you know and
if it has to be an ordinance to make
that all happen properly to comply with
everything then so be it. Um and maybe
that's then what we should push for. Uh
you know but I I'm trying to I'm just
stepping back and thinking the
practicality of this. How do we actually
get this done? How do we actually on a
day-to-day basis manage these projects
and and make this work? And you know
adding town meetings into the process.
If it has to happen, if it's absolutely
required, so be it. But you know, these
boards are elected for a reason. You
know, we you know, the boards get to
make a lot of decisions. Why not this
one is is the one that comes to mind. So
that's just my thoughts. They're they're
just kind of been percolating in my mind
since I read the town attorney's
opinion. Uh just my take uh my two
cents. We appreciate it because you
spent the most time with Shannon trying
to come up with procedures and
everything, but maybe even if we had
some kind of signed agreement, it wasn't
going to hold up anyways, you know,
based on we need to have an ordinance.
So, I'm going to summarize it. I think
we're gonna, you know, delay this to
discuss next month again unless someone
comes to us before that. Um they and
maybe we should have a meeting with the
board of select, maybe we should try to
get another joint meeting together.
Well, exactly. Well, we've done that
before, too. But I, you know, so having
attended the board of selectmen meeting
and listening to it, seeing like Eric
said, they didn't have the vote. There's
nothing we're doing right now, but I
think it's healthy that we had a
discussion that we want to have a
process to follow. Um I think the board
of ed members that would hear are here
would appreciate that too. I mean um
yeah, there's no action at this point.
Um a good healthy discussion. We all
want to do the right thing. Um and we'll
go from there. So, I'm going to move on
to item C, which is I put that on there,
too, because usually at this time of
year, we're hearing about some possible
transfers that might be upcoming. Eric,
if it's too premature because you need
to have balances and then um Liz, did I
did you need to did you want more on No.
Well, someone has their hand up and
there's a person named Ron. Ron. Yeah,
that's Ron Langoy.
Should he save it for for So, we'll
definitely get to hear your point at
public speak if you don't mind. We
generally don't open it to the public in
the middle of the meetings. Okay. We
can't Yeah, we'll look forward to
hearing from you then. Thank you so much
um for being here. So,
you know, thanks, Liz. Um, moving on.
Eric, should we wait until Cheryl and
Chris? I know Chris has hung in there,
too. Um,
have, you know, I I just brought up I
don't know if you're going to have any
major transfers that you're going to
bring to us. We don't need the whole
thing if there's going to be an official
meeting, but um, so there will have to
be a meeting and you will have to
approve the fund transfers. Yeah. Um,
per the auditor, he's long said that we
don't need to be leveling up at the
individual line item. We only need to be
uh department, you know, at the
department level. Um, currently, you
know, at the department or at the ex the
um category level. Currently, it looks
like we have 12. We're over in 12
categories, but most of them are not
over significantly.
Um, so at some point, and we'll probably
want to do it all at once, which means
we'll do it in August once the official
books close in August and any bill that
we're going to pay off of that fiscal
year, you know, has been required to be
in. Um, so we should be able to do it
all in one shot at the August meeting.
Um, and that will be a Cherokee thing.
Um, great.
So, we'll wait till then. Um, you gave
us the overview on the balances or the
possible surplus and what you
anticipated. So, thank you for that. So,
we'll move along to number eight, the
approval of meeting minutes. Um, hold
on. Stop.
The important thing was you guys have to
officially appoint the auditor. Um Oh,
did I I'm reading off my Yeah. So, we
discussed this uh earlier around
February,
you know, I had said to the board that
if you were going to consider changing
auditors, we would have needed to go to
uh uh RFP like January, February time
frame. So we had time enough to make a
decision before we have to report our
choice at the time you elected not to do
that. Um my recommendation is stay with
Mahoney Sable. Um I'm involved with uh I
guess four organizations that have to
deal with state audits including the
health district and uh uh
Connecticut Conference of Municipalities
has to do it as does um Crag the Capital
Region. Um and all of those
organizations
have been struggling to get auditing
firms to do it. There's we kind of
acknowledge that it's a statewide
problem that we're very short auditors
overall. So I don't think
we would save money and I think if we
got on a new auditing firm we would be
at the back of their list. Um which
means we would probably be even later in
the queue than we are with Mahoney
Sable. So my recommendation
for that. Yeah. Do we make motions to do
that, Eric? Yeah, you would have to make
a motion to reappoint Mahoney Sable. I
made a motion to reappoint Mahoney Sable
to continue the work that he's doing for
the town of Andover.
It looks like and I'm doing for the
minutes and Rob England has second it.
All those in favor for keeping Mahoney
Sable as our town auditor say I. I. I.
So it looks like Kim
I. Okay. So it looks like the motion
passes five to zero that we keep Money
Sable as the um auditor of record for
the town of Andover.
The only thing I'll add is I I remember
discussions years back trying to f find
different auditors and everything and
you know I can only echo Eric's
sentiments on this. uh they know us,
they've been working with us. It it kind
of sucks to be locked into to one
contractor for any particular project,
but
uh the alternatives are not better. And
we're a small town. I just remember him
saying like with Liz's question having
the history of we're such a small town.
Of course, they do their big customers
first. They have to get to them and then
they plot us in. Especially if there's
not enough of them to go around. It's
pretty hard to get, you know, boutique
service when you're a town of our size
and uh and there's already a crunch. So,
it is what it is. Kind of you roll with
it. I think we're Yeah. So, that that
passed. So, we're all set with that.
Eric, I can move on. Yep. Okay. So,
moving on um to number eight or approval
of the meeting minutes. Um, does anyone
want to make a motion to
um accept the minutes from the January
22nd, 2025 regular meeting?
I'll make the motion to accept those.
Louise Goodwin makes the motion. Do I
have a second of the motion? I'll second
it. Liz Loach has seconded the motion.
All in favor of the minutes being
approved um as written, say I. Hi. Hi,
Kim. You're an I. Um, I haven't had time
to read them, so I'll stay for now.
Thank you. Okay, so the motion will pass
with a four to zero one abstaining. Kim
Persson has abstained on that. Um,
moving on. I'm going to gonna say
I guess I'm well, I can't go out of
order when we come to D. There's I don't
think we're going to go forward with D,
but um anyone want to make a motion for
the March 26th meeting minutes for
approval?
Yeah, I didn't have a chance to read
that one.
Does anyone have a problem with with
just pushing these?
Yeah, why don't we push the rest of them
back? in May 7th. It was just an
important meeting and there was a lot of
like, you know, references to people who
said different things. So, I just wanted
to take time to just read it. Um, so why
don't if anyone doesn't object, I'd like
to move these back, Eric, just one more
month and I can let Kate know. So, we
did approve the January 22nd, but we'll
hold on the next three. We'll put those
into old business for our next meeting.
Yeah. Yeah. See that one? No. Thank you
everybody for that. And now moving on to
number nine, which is board open
discussion. I don't know if anyone else
has any further discussion or any items
they want to bring forward.
Go ahead. I'll just mention one thing
just to keep it in our minds. not, you
know, anything big, but we talked about
this a little bit with Eric, I think, in
our last meeting in terms of where we
feel our fund balance, our unexpended,
unassigned fund balance ought to be,
what our target should be given that
technically we're below the state
recommended level. Uh, I have my own
thoughts on this. They're not set in
stone by any stretch of the imagination.
I've always been the sort of person who
likes more savings than less. So, I love
the idea of just a general sense of like
why don't we try to pump that number up?
But at some point, we should probably
when we have probably all our members,
uh, talk about having a specific target
that we should try to reach. And that's
just something I think everybody should
just kind of keep in mind. Think about
it. Think about what your own
preferences are. um taking into account
that we in terms of what the the rainy
day scenarios are for our town that
we're not super floodprone or you know
some of these other things that we do
have pretty wellunded capital funds but
at the same time we're well below not
well below but we're below that
two-month
figure. So, do we want to shoot for 14
or 15 or whatever? You know, let's talk
about that in a future meeting. Just
that's my only thought for the moment.
Uh let's not lose sight of it and six
months from now wake up and realize we
never made a decision.
Sounds good, Rob. Appreciate that. I
mean, we also do have surpluses every
year. Like you said, we do have the fund
that funds that are there in the
contingency, but um definitely the
auditor did point out that we're about
one point, you know, one and a half
months funded or whatever. Yeah, we're
like 1.6 and they want two and our
contingency fund is tiny honestly. Oh
yeah, you know,
just like you said, or our small town,
but we will. Yeah, thank you for
bringing it. Anybody else have any
open discussion items?
Okay. Hearing none. Um I don't know of
any correspondence under number 10. Um
you know so we don't need to discuss
that. So we'll move on to item 11 and we
will bring it out for public speak
again.
Um Liz, I had a question. Um I wanted to
make a motion for the um executive
session to hear Eric out. So maybe we
could um do the executive session after
after public after public speak is what
I'm thinking. Okay. Anyone else second
that? I'll second that. Yeah. Okay. Liz
Loach has made the motion to go into
executive session after public speak and
Louise Goodwin has seconded the motion.
So we will do that after public speak.
Okay. Moving on to number. Do we vote?
Oh. Oh, sorry. I get I get quick at the
end. Oh, can we vote on that? Yeah, I'm
sure it'll be All those in favor say
I
Kim as well. So motion passes 50. We
will go into executive session quickly.
Okay. Um number 11, public speak. Um
Terry Smith, I'm all set. Thank you
everybody.
Welcome Valerie Bruno.
I just want to say thank you for voting
Mahoney and Sable in again as he alluded
to. Um things are getting better on both
sides. They've been super helpful in the
years with our Edmonds software system
and working with Terry and um you know
it they've really done a good job on
both sides. So um I'm glad you guys
voted to keep them. Thank you. Okay.
Thank you. Um let's see. and creme.
Nothing at all. Thank you. Okay. Caitlyn
Macintosh Greenhouse.
I just wanted to say thank you guys for
having him come for Mahoney and Sable
tonight. Um just appreciate the review
with the slide. Um was very informative.
And then on on the front of of what we
do with the capital fund and how we fund
that and procedurally what happens um I
I really hope that we can come to some
agreement in terms of what we do want to
go ahead. Um, just echoing other
people's sentiments, it's frustrating
that, you know, a person from your board
and a person from our board spent over a
year trying to come up with a tri board
policy and then the board of selectmen
did not want a part in it and now we
need to change things again. So
hopefully we can get it finalized
somehow. Thank you. Thank you, Caitlyn
Kathy Maldonado.
Kathy, I'll come back to you one more
time. I'm not sure if you're still with
us there. Ron, go ahead. Are you ready?
Yes. Um, thank you for uh having me
speak. Um, I was just listening to a few
things. Uh, Eric is great. Sounds like
it what he's doing. My concern with what
he was saying where there's the the
board of um select ones can just go
ahead and say for a capital budget go
ahead and spend it because we already
have the money reserved without talking
to the board of finance really bothers
me because it's like a husband not
talking to his wife when you're going to
spend some money not knowing that
something else was already used for that
or that got moved. I think the
communication should be better between
those two. Um, when something's going to
be spent um, and just, you know, just
talking back and forth. Doesn't have to
be a town meeting because the town
appointed you guys to handle the
finances. It's which is great. You guys
do a fantastic job. Um, I actually look
at trying to maybe apply for that board
of finance when it comes up. But, um,
uh, but I was just saying is the
communication there I think should be a
little bit better. And um like Rob said,
we don't have to have a town meeting all
the time for stuff like that, but at
least communication between when money
is getting when money is going to get
spent, the board of finance should be
people that knowing where it's going to
be coming out of what it's spent even
though it was saved for that purpose.
That's all. Thank you. Can Can I address
something real quick if that's okay,
Joan? Yeah, go ahead. I just wanted to
say, Ron, just so you know, you know,
the capital projects all go through the
capital improvement committee and the
capital improvement committee includes
representatives from all the boards. Um,
and I I am the board of finance rep on
that. So, typically what happens is
somebody, you know, there's a capital
project that needs doing, it's brought
before CIP, we ask our questions, what
have you, and then we either bless it or
don't. And then at that point I my job
as liazison is to bring that to the
attention of the board of finance. So on
the one hand the board of selectman can
still make their own decisions and do
their own thing. But at the other hand I
generally feel that we do a decent job
of not having it be some sort of
surprise expenditure from a capital
account just because the money is there.
we generally know what's coming down the
pike and Eric is usually very
informative in our meetings telling us
what's going on and what's what's
happening what's needs to be done. So on
the one hand yes the board of selectman
can haul off and do whatever but on the
other hand we are not in the dark or
anything. uh the process does work to
keep us generally informed as to what's
what's going on and and that's what the
purpose of the CIP that's what it's
there for basically. So just FYI it it
it does work reasonably well in my
opinion but that's just my take.
Well yeah because Eric seems to be
confused about which direction he's
looking for a clear direction to go to.
Yeah. the the pro sort of the steps what
are the what are the right what's the
order that I understand and and he's not
wrong about our charter that there there
it is easy to read that charter and
think to yourself gosh that could be
clearer that's not wrong
I I have been there myself I assure you
all right well thank you for your your
answer
thank you Ron for taking the time and
and your contributions we appreciate it
um Kathy Maldonado.
All right. I think I'm Yeah. Oh, go
ahead, Kathy. No, I'm all good. Okay.
Thank you. Thank you for attending.
Thank you to everybody that took the
time to come tonight. We always
appreciate it. Um, and
I guess I'm not adjourning, I don't
think. Right. We're going into executive
session first, right? We get to then
we'll adjourn after. Then we come back
in. All right. everybody. I guess
everybody else that um you know the
meeting is for all intents and purposes
over because we're just going to come
back and adjourn to this quick session.
So, thank you for your time. Looks like
So, the one thing you do have to do is
since I'm not a board of uh finance
member, if you want me in the in the
executive session, you have to
explicitly state that. Yeah, I think we
would like to invite you into the
executive session, Eric. I'm just saying
it for the people doing inviting Eric
Anderson, town manager into executive
session with the board of finance. Okay,
so we are coming out of executive se
executive session at 8:55 and returning
to our regular meeting at this time.
And I move to ajourn.
And I second. Oh, I and I move to
adjourn. Um, can I have a vote on that
or you second it? Is that okay? I second
it. In favor.
I I I I. So, the votes are five to zero.
We will be adjourning. Everybody have a
good evening. Take care.
See you next month.
The month after I forget.